Add developer guide for 3D interactivity (#144)
napari/napari.github.io: guides/stable/3D_interactivity.md

# 3D interactivity

## Coordinate systems in napari

> In napari, there are three main coordinate systems: (1) canvas, (2) world, and (3) layer. The canvas coordinates system is the 2D coordinate system of the canvas on which the scene is rendered. World coordinates are the nD coordinates of the entire scene. As the name suggests, the layer coordinates is the nD coordinate system of the data in a given layer. Layer coordinates are specific the each layer's data and are related to the world coordinate system via the layer transforms.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In napari, there are three main coordinate systems: (1) canvas, (2) world, and (3) layer. The canvas coordinates system is the 2D coordinate system of the canvas on which the scene is rendered. World coordinates are the nD coordinates of the entire scene. As the name suggests, layer coordinates are the nD coordinate system of the data in a given layer. Layer coordinates are specific the each layer's data and are related to the world coordinate system via the layer transforms.
```

![coordinate-systems](images/3d_interaction_coordianates.png)

## In 3D mode, clicks are lines

> Since the 3D scene is rendered on a 2D surface (your screen), your mouse click does not map to a specific point in space. Thus, when rendering a scene in 3D, napari interprets your click as a line in the direction of the camera view that goes through the point that view ray intersects the camera plane.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Since the 3D scene is rendered on a 2D surface (your screen), your mouse click does not map to a specific point in space. As the view is a [parallel projection](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Parallel_projection), napari can determine a line through 3D space that intersects the canvas where the user clicked.

Reviewer: small note, technically we also support projection with perspective (shift, right click and drag I think?  `Camera.perspective`)) but this is a bit broken, doesn't work with 3D interactivity or the points layer in general...

Author: Good point. I'll add a note about that.

![click-line](images/3d_interaction_click_line.png)

When a user clicks or moves the mouse in the canvas, napari emits a mouse event with the following properties:

> - pos: the position of the click in canvas coordinates.

Reviewer 2: I vote for a name that explains the thing. If a comment is necessary to explain what a variable contains, the variable has a bad name.
```suggestion
- canvas_position: the position of the click in canvas coordinates.
```

Reviewer: Agree - we should refactor the events. In this case this is standard napari stuff, not directly related to 3D interactivity, so I think we should push forward, document the way things currently work and follow up with a general events refactor/documentation update.

Refactoring this will be quite a large API change for the events system in general which people definitely use quite a lot, we should probably do this as part of a `0.5.0` transition :)

> - position: the position of the click in world coordinates.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- world_position: the position of the click in world coordinates.
```
What does this variable contain? Above you mentioned that this cannot be a point. What is it then?

Reviewer: it contains a point on the canvas plane (i.e. plane perpendicular to the ray being cast in parallel projection), transformed into the world coordinate system - agree this should be clearer and that it's non obvious. Maybe we should separate out these concepts generally @kevinyamauchi ? `camera_plane_point_world`

Author: I will clarify the description of `pos` and `position` in the docs. I agree that both the names and descriptions are unclear. As @alisterburt  said, the names are pre-existing napari public API, so I think we should discuss in a separate issue.

Author: I have attempted to clarify the meaning of the mouse events. They now read:

- **pos**: the position of the click in canvas coordinates.
- **position**: the position of the click in world coordinates. The point is located at the intersection of the click line (`view_direction`) and a plane parallel to the camera plane (i.e,. a plane normal to `view_direction`).
- **view_direction**: a unit vector giving the direction of the camera in
    world coordinates.
- **dims_displayed**: a list of the dimensions currently being displayed
    in the viewer. This comes from `viewer.dims.displayed`.
- **dims_point**: the indices for the data in view in world coordinates. This comes from `viewer.dims.point`.

Author: I have made an issue on the napari repo to consider renaming the event properties.

https://github.com/napari/napari/issues/3189

- view_direction: a unit vector giving the direction of the camera in
    world coordinates.
- dims_displayed: a list of the dimensions currently being displayed
    in the viewer. This comes from viewer.dims.displayed.
- dims_point: the indices for the data in view in world coordinates.

> 

Reviewer 2: Just wondering, that means the following would roughly work, right?
```
def my_mouse_event(event)
    print(event.position)
```
Would it make sense to provide such a code snipped as example?

Reviewer 2: Ok, I just saw the example code further down :-)

## Determining where the click intersects the data

> Each napari layer has a method called `get_ray_intersections()` that will return the points on the data bounding box that a given line will intersect (`start_point ` and `end_point `). `start_point` and `end_point` are  the end points of line segment that intersects the layer's axis-alinged data bounding box. `near_point` is the end point that is closest to the camera (i.e, the "first" intersection") and `far_point` is the end point that is farthest from the camera (i.e., the "last" intersection). You can use the line segment between `start_point` and `end_point` to interrogate the layer data that is "under" your cursor.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Each napari layer has a method called `get_ray_intersections()` that will return the points on the data bounding box that a given line will intersect (`start_point ` and `end_point `). `start_point` and `end_point` are the end points of a line segment that intersects the layer's axis-alinged data bounding box. `near_point` is the end point that is closest to the camera (i.e, the "first" intersection") and `far_point` is the end point that is farthest from the camera (i.e., the "last" intersection). You can use the line segment between `start_point` and `end_point` to interrogate the layer data that is "under" your cursor.
```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Each napari layer has a method called `get_ray_intersections()` that will return the points on the data bounding box that a given line will intersect (`start_point ` and `end_point `). `start_point` and `end_point` are the end points of a line segment that intersects the layer's axis-alinged data bounding box. `near_point` is the end point that is closest to the camera (i.e, the "first" intersection) and `far_point` is the end point that is farthest from the camera (i.e., the "last" intersection). You can use the line segment between `start_point` and `end_point` to interrogate the layer data that is "under" your cursor.
```

small modification of @haesleinhuepf 's suggestion

![click-intersection](images/3d_interaction_ray_intersection.png)

See the `get_ray_intersection()` docstrings below for details. Note that if the line does not intersect the data bounding box (i.e., the click was outside of the data), `start_point` and `end_point` are `None`. The `position` and `view_direction` should be provided as world coordinates if `world` is set to True and in layer coordinates if `world` is set to `False`.

```
def get_ray_intersections(
    self,
    position: List[float],
    view_direction: np.ndarray,
    dims_displayed: List[int],
    world: bool = True,

> ) -> Union[Tuple[np.ndarray, np.ndarray], Tuple[None, None]]:

Reviewer: reading this makes me think - does it make sense to simplify this interface a bit for the user. We could hide a lot of the complexity in a utility function which does what this method does and have this method take only the mouse event?

`Layer.get_ray_intersections(event)` -> start and end point

Author: I am open to adding a convenience method or function that takes the mous event. I think it is important to keep a public function that takes the keyword arguments above. That way if a user wants to interrogate their data outside of a mouse event callback, they don't have to create a mock `Event`.

Reviewer: cool I'll try to get this done later today. Are you okay with having that function be public but tucked away in `napari.layers.utils` or would you prefer to have both on the layer? I think I would prefer tucking it away and pointing to it from these docs

Author: I think it would be nice to have the one that takes the event also on the layer. That way the user doesn't have to import anything to create a mouse event callback.

Reviewer: slight misunderstanding I think, what I'm proposing is
- more complex utility function in some utils file (but public)
- simpler function which takes a mouse event directly on the layer

Author: Got it. Is there a reason not to have both on the layer? The function that takes the event basically becomes a passthrough. I think we'd want to leave at least `layer.get_value()` as is since that has been part of the public API for a while.

Reviewer: no specific reason - happy for both to be on the layer with the `_from_mouse_event` nomenclature!

Author: Cool, let's have them both on the layer then. Thanks!

        is set by the world keyword argument.
    view_direction : np.ndarray
        a unit vector giving the direction of the ray in nD coordinates.
        World vs. data is set by the world keyword argument.
    dims_displayed :
        a list of the dimensions currently being displayed in the viewer.
    world : bool
        True if the provided coordinates are in world coordinates.
        Default value is True.

    Returns
    -------
    start_point : Optional[np.ndarray]
        The point on the axis-aligned data bounding box that the cursor click
        intersects with. This is the point closest to the camera.
        The point is the full nD coordinates of the layer data.
        If the click does not intersect the axis-aligned data bounding box,
        None is returned.
    end_point : Optional[np.ndarray]
        The point on the axis-aligned data bounding box that the cursor click
        intersects with. This is the point farthest from the camera.
        The point is the full nD coordinates of the layer data.
        If the click does not intersect the axis-aligned data bounding box,
        None is returned.
	"""
```

## Adding 3D interactivity via mouse events

> Custom 3D interactivity can be added via mouse callbacks. The `layer.get_ray_intersections()` function has been designed to work seamlessly with the napari mouse callback event. You can pass the mouse callback event properties to `layer.get_ray_intersections()` get the `start_point` and `end_point` of where the click line intersects the layer data. 

Reviewer: see above about seamlessness

Author: We can update here when you've added the convenience function!

```
@layer.mouse_drag_callbacks.append
def on_click(layer, event):
	# get the points where the click intersects the 
    start_point, end_point = layer.get_ray_intersections(
        position=event.position,
        view_direction=event.view_direction,
        dims_displayed=event.dims_displayed,
        world=True
    )
    if (start_point is not None) and (end_point is not None):
    	# use start_point and end_point to interrogate layer data
```

> For an example implementation, see the [`cursor_ray.py`](https://github.com/napari/napari/blob/master/examples/cursor_ray.py) example.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For an example implementation, see [`cursor_ray.py`](https://github.com/napari/napari/blob/master/examples/cursor_ray.py).
```

## Getting the layer data under the cursor

> We are currently implementing convenience methods to the layers (`layer.get_value()`) to get the layer data value underneath the cursor that is "on top" (i.e., closest to `start_point`). Like `layer.get_ray_intersections()`, `layer.get_value()` takes the click position, view direction, dims_displayed in either world or layer coordinates (see `world` argument) as input. Thus, it can be easily integrated into a mouse event callback. Note that `layer.get_value()` returns `None` if the layer is not currently visible. See the docstring below for details.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
There are convenience methods in the layer objects (`layer.get_value()`) to get the layer data value underneath the cursor that is "on top" (i.e., closest to `start_point`). Like `layer.get_ray_intersections()`, `layer.get_value()` takes the click position, view direction, dims_displayed in either world or layer coordinates (see `world` argument) as input. Thus, it can be easily integrated into a mouse event callback. Note that `layer.get_value()` returns `None` if the layer is not currently visible. See the docstring below for details.
```

Reviewer: same point as above, should we provide the 'arbitrary' interrogation as a util function somewhere and have users pass the mouse event directly to the method on the layer?

Author: Yeah, maybe we add something like `get_value_from_mouse_event()`? Too long?

Author: As with the`get_ray_intersections` function that takes an event, I think the `get_value` one should also be on the layer so that the developer doesn't need to import anything extra to make a mouse callback.

```
    def get_value(
        self,
        position,
        *,
        view_direction: Optional[np.ndarray] = None,
        dims_displayed: Optional[List[int]] = None,
        world=False,
    ):
        """Value of the data at a position.

        If the layer is not visible, return None.

        Parameters
        ----------
        position : tuple
            Position in either data or world coordinates.
        view_direction : Optional[np.ndarray]
            A unit vector giving the direction of the ray in nD world coordinates.
            The default value is None.
        dims_displayed : Optional[List[int]]
            A list of the dimensions currently being displayed in the viewer.
            The default value is None.
        world : bool
            If True the position is taken to be in world coordinates
            and converted into data coordinates. False by default.

        Returns
        -------
        value : tuple, None
            Value of the data. If the layer is not visible return None.
```

> We have implemented `layer.get_value()` for the layers below. All other layers with return `None` from `layer.get_value()` when called while the viewer is in a 3D rendering mode.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We have implemented `layer.get_value()` for the layers below. All other layers with return `None` from `layer.get_value()` when called while the viewer is in a 3D rendering mode.
```
This sounds like not ideal. Maybe create an issue about what's happening here on development side at the moment and link the issue...

Reviewer: issue added at napari/napari#3187

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Progress on the implementation of `layer.get_value()` can be found at [#3187](https://github.com/napari/napari/issues/3187). Layers for which this is not yet implemented will return `None` if `layer.get_value()` is called whilst the viewer is in a 3D rendering mode.
```

> - `Labels`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
remove wrt change above
